SQL stands for structured query language. It's a programming language used in creating databases and storing databases


SQL relies on data bases so you have to create one if you wanna store any data

-- create database if not exists Names;

    Where names is the database. To run this database, use ctrl+enter on the line

now the database is there but it' not in use so now we must select the database

-- use Names;

    Then run it using ctrl+enter

Now we have our database. The next thing to do is to create a table. A table is a collection of data within the database.

-- create table if not exists ChildrenNames

    then run it. remember to terminate each line of code with a semicolon. 
    NOTE: the keywords "if not exist" aren't exactly necessary since sql hasbeen updated past that point. It's more like a formality.

DATATYPES

    Unfortunately, I didn't go thru the DATATYPES but i think there are like 7. The ones I know of are:
    -- NUMERIC
    1. Numeric Data Types:

Used for storing numbers (with or without decimals).

            Type	 -       Description	           -   Example
        INT / INTEGER  -	Whole numbers (no decimals).    -	25, -100, 0
        SMALLINT    -	Smaller whole numbers (uses less storage).  -	500
        BIGINT  -	Very large whole numbers.   -	9000000000
        DECIMAL(p, s) or NUMERIC(p, s)	 -   Fixed-point numbers with exact  precision. Good for money or measurements.
        p = total digits, s = digits after decimal.  -	DECIMAL(6,2) → allows 1234.56
    
    

    2. Character / String Data Types

Used for text, letters, or symbols.

Type	Description	Example
CHAR(n)	    -    Fixed-length text. Always stores exactly n characters (pads with spaces if shorter).   -	CHAR(5) → 'Hi '
VARCHAR(n)      -	Variable-length text, up to n characters. More efficient for most text fields.  -	VARCHAR(50) → 'Hello World'
TEXT    -	For long blocks of text (like paragraphs, notes, articles).     -	'This is a long message...'


The other data types arent used often and we havent used them in class since the first class

FILLING THE TABLE:



NOTE: terminating lines

In the global field, termination is done with a ";" . within a table or function, it's done with a comma ','. And the last line in a table, function or globe is unterminated. Termination should only be done when something comes after
















ALTER 
Alter is used to modify a table. By adding columns, modify columns, renaming columns, adding primary key, removing columns exact

Examples:

1a. ALTER TABLE students
    ADD age INT;

1b. ALTER TABLE students
    ADD (email VARCHAR(100), address TEXT);    

    This adds a new column to the table

2a. ALTER TABLE students
    MODIFY age SMALLINT;
    This changes the datatype if the column

2b. ALTER TABLE students
    CHANGE COLUMN firstname first_name VARCHAR(50);
    This renames a column

3. ALTER TABLE students
    DROP COLUMN address;
    This removes the column